---
author: Ray Dalio
title: Principles
---
Principles are concepts that can be applied over and over again in similar circumstances as distinct from narrow answers to specific questions.
Values: what you consider important.
Principles: what allow you to live a life consistent with those values.
Adopting pre-packaged principles without much thought exposes you to the risk of inconsistency with your true values.
Your principles will determine your standards of behavior. When you enter into relationships with other people, your and their principles will determine how you interact.
People who have shared values and principles get along. People who don’t will suffer through constant misunderstandings and conflict with one another.
To be successful, you must make correct, tough choices. You must be able to "cut off a leg to save a life," both on an individual level and, if you lead people, on a group level.

I want you to work for yourself, to come up with independent opinions, to stress-test them, to be wary about being overconfident, and to reflect on the consequences of your decisions and constantly improve.
I learned that failure is by and large due to not accepting and successfully dealing with the realities of life, and that achieving success is simply a matter of accepting and successfully dealing with all my realities.
I learned that one of the greatest sources of problems in our society arises from people having loads of wrong theories in their heads—often theories that are critical of others—that they won’t test by speaking to the relevant people about them.
I learned that everyone makes mistakes and has weaknesses and that one of the most important things that differentiates people is their approach to handling them.
I met a number of great people and learned that none of them were born great—they all made lots of mistakes and had lots weaknesses—and that great people become great by looking at their mistakes and weaknesses and figuring out how to get around them.
In short, I learned that being totally truthful, especially about mistakes and weaknesses, led to a rapid rate of improvement and movement toward what I wanted.
While most others seem to believe that having answers is better than having questions, I believe that having questions is better than having answers because it leads to more learning.
While most others seem to believe that finding out about one’s weaknesses is a bad thing, I believe that it is a good thing because it is the first step toward finding out what to do about them and not letting them stand in your way.
What I wanted was to have an interesting, diverse life filled with lots of learning—and especially meaningful work and meaningful relationships. I feel that I have gotten these in abundance and I am happy.
The people who really change the world are the ones who see what’s possible and figure out how to make that happen.

Truth more precisely, an accurate understanding of reality— is the essential foundation for producing good outcomes.
Good is operating consistently with reality (the natural laws that govern our universe); bad = operating inconsistently with reality.
I believe that evolution, which is the natural movement toward better adaptation, is the greatest single force in the universe, and that it is good.
I believe that the desire to evolve, i.e., to get better, is probably humanity’s most pervasive driving force. Enjoying your job, a craft, or your favorite sport comes from the innate satisfaction of getting better.
In other words, the sequence of 1) seeking new things (goals); 2) working and learning in the process of pursuing these goals; 3) obtaining these goals; and 4) then doing this over and over again is the personal evolutionary process that fulfills most of us and moves society forward.
I believe that pursuing self-interest in harmony with the laws of the universe and contributing to evolution is universally rewarded, and what I call “good."
In other words, there is an excellent correlation between giving society what it wants and making money, and almost no correlation between the desire to make money and how much money one makes.
It is extremely important to one’s happiness and success to know oneself—most importantly to understand one’s own values and abilities—and then to find the right fits. We all have things that we value that we want and we all have strengths and weaknesses that affect our paths for getting them. The most important quality that differentiates successful people from unsuccessful people is our capacity to learn and adapt to these things.

Reality + Dreams + Determination = A Successful Life.
Also, for most people happiness is much more determined by how things turn out relative to their expectations rather than the absolute level of their conditions.
This basic principle suggests that you can follow one of two paths to happiness: 1) have high expectations and strive to exceed them, or 2) lower your expectations so that they are at or below your conditions. Most of us choose the first path, which means that to be happy we have to keep evolving.
Another principle to keep in mind is that people need meaningful work and meaningful relationships in order to be fulfilled. I have observed this to be true for virtually everyone, and I know that it’s true for me.
