
Over the
last five years, there has been an incredible shift in leverage from investors
to founders.  It’s good in most ways, but bad in an important few.  Founders’ desire for control is good in
moderation but hurts companies when it gets taken to extremes. 
Many founders
(or at least, many of the founders I talk to) generally want few to no
outsiders on their boards.  A popular way to win an A round in the
current environment is to not ask for a board seat.  Some investors
are happy to do this—it’s certainly easier to write a check and go hang out on
the beach than it is to take a board seat.  And this trend is likely
to continue, because these new investors are generally willing to pay much
higher prices than investors that want to be involved with the company.
But great
board members, with a lot of experience seeing companies get built, are the
sort of people founders should want thinking about their companies every day.  There
are a lot of roles where experience doesn’t matter in a startup, but board
members usually aren’t one of them.  Board
members are very useful in helping founders think big and hire executives. 
Board
members are also a good forcing function to keep the company focused on
execution.  In my experience, companies
without any outsiders on their boards often have less discipline around operational
cadence. 
Finally,
board members stick with the company when things really go wrong, in a way that
advisors usually don’t.
Board members certainly don't have to be investors.  If founders
do choose to take money without an involved board member, I think it’s very
important to get an advisor with a significant equity position that will play
the role of a board member (or better, actually put them on the board). 
Personally,
I think the ideal board structure for most early-stage companies is a 5-member
board with 2 founders, 2 investors, and one outsider.  I think a 4-member
board with 2 founders, 1 investor and 1 outsider is also good (in practice, the
even number is almost never a problem).
As a side
note, bad board members are disastrous.  You should check references
thoroughly on someone before you let them join your board.
The
companies that have had the biggest impact and created the most value have had
excellent board members (and executives).  I don’t believe this is a
coincidence.
It’s a good
idea to keep enough control so that investors can’t fire you (there are a lot
of different ways to do this), but beyond that, it’s important to bring in
other people and trust them to help you build the company.
 
Thanks to
Mike Moritz for reviewing a draft of this.
