
There is a long and sordid history of people coming out of the
woodwork with bogus claims when huge amounts of money are on the line.  This has just happened to Cruise, which is run
by my friend Kyle Vogt.  Cruise is a
YC company, and I also personally invested in the company last year.
As detailed in a complaint filed by Kyle and Cruise, Jeremy
Guillory collaborated with Kyle for a very short period early on in the life of
Cruise.  I know that at least Kyle had
been thinking about autonomous vehicles for quite some time, and I assume
Jeremy had been too given all of the attention on the topic in the press about
Google’s activities.  After a little over a month, Kyle and Jeremy parted ways.  This event happened more than two years ago,
and well before the company had achieved much of anything. 
There is more detail in this footnote [1] if you’re curious, or
you can read the complaint online here.
Jeremy is now claiming to Kyle that he should own a substantial
amount of Cruise’s equity, and by doing so is interfering with the pending
Cruise/GM merger.
Kyle made an extremely generous offer to settle this claim by offering
to give Jeremy a lot of his own money. [2] In my opinion, Jeremy’s claim is completely
baseless and opportunistic—it obviously comes at a bad time for the company
with the merger still pending, and Kyle understandably wanted to avoid a
protracted litigation.  Kyle has worked
incredibly hard to settle this claim amicably, despite what I consider to be
the obvious ridiculousness of it, and has done far more than I would have
personally done under these circumstances.
Kyle and Cruise are now suing Jeremy for making a false equity
claim.  It’s an incredible bummer these situations have to happen in the
first place.  This is one of the least
sensible professional situations I’ve ever been involved with, but
unfortunately these situations are not uncommon.
I recognize that I place myself at risk talking about this, but
it’s time that someone speaks publicly about situations like what is happening
at Cruise.  And so I’ve decided to say
something before the lawyers can stop me. 
Even with this issue, both sides still expect the merger to close on
schedule in Q2.

 
 
[1] Kyle and Jeremy applied to YC together but Jeremy left
before the YC interview.  Neither took a salary, and Kyle was funding the
company by himself at that point.
According to Kyle, Jeremy did not write any code or build any
hardware during this exploratory period.  He did help find an office for
the company.  At the point of Jeremy’s departure, neither he nor Kyle had
signed employment agreements, stock agreements, or any documents of any sort
with the company.  Even if Jeremy had signed a stock agreement, he
wouldn’t have reached the standard 1-year cliff for founders to vest any
equity.
Kyle told me that Jeremy would occasionally reach out to
congratulate him on press about Cruise (for example, he reached out to
congratulate Kyle on Cruise’s Series A), but he never asked for anything—until
now, when, in my opinion, he saw an opportunity to make a ton of money.
[2] I was personally involved all day on Friday last week to try
to help settle this claim.  Given the time pressure because of the pending
merger, we had to set a Friday at 5 pm deadline for Kyle’s offer, which Jeremy
let expire. 
