
Startup employees often do
not get treated very well when it comes to stock compensation.   New ideas float around occasionally, but
lawyers are usually averse to trying new things, and investors don’t feel
that they have enough incentive to try something new for employees.
There are four major
problems: 
1) Employees usually don’t
get enough stock. 
2) If an employee leaves
the company, he or she often can’t afford to exercise and pay taxes on their
options. 
3) Employee options
sometimes get unfavorable tax treatment.
4) Employees usually don’t have enough information about the stock or options. 
Here are some proposed
solutions:
1) Startups should give
employees more stock.  Value is created
over many, many years.  Founders
certainly deserve a huge premium for starting the earliest, but probably not
100 or 200x what employee number 5 gets. 
Additionally, companies can now get more done with less people.
It’s very difficult to put
precise numbers on this because the specifics of every situation matter so
much.  Perhaps the best way to think
about it is to try to come up with a total compensation package with the same
expected value (using the company valuation of the last round, or a
best-efforts guess if it’s been a long time since the round) as the employee
would get at a big company like Google.  As an extremely rough stab at actual numbers,
I think a company ought to be giving at least 10% in total to the first 10
employees, 5% to the next 20, and 5% to the next 50.  In practice, the optimal numbers may be much
higher.
One problem is that startups
try to have very small option pools after their A rounds, because the dilution
only comes from the founders and not the investors in most A-round term
sheets.  The right thing to do would be
to increase the size of the option pool post-A round, but unfortunately this
rarely happens—no one wants to dilute themselves more, and this leads to
short-sighted stinginess much of the time.
Option pools are complete
fiction; boards can increase them whenever they want.  It should never be used as a reason for not
making a grant.
2) Most employees only
have 90 days after they leave a job to exercise their options.  Unfortunately, this requires money to cover
the strike price and the tax bill due for the year of exercise (which is
calculated on the difference between the strike and the current FMV).  This is often more cash than an employee has,
and so the employee often has to choose between walking away from vested
options he or she can’t afford to exercise, or being locked into staying at the
company.  It’s a particularly bad
situation when an employee gets terminated.
This doesn’t seem
fair.  The best solution I have heard is
from Adam D’Angelo at Quora.  The idea
is to grant options that are exercisable for 10 years from the grant date, which should cover nearly all cases (i.e. the
company will probably either go public, get acquired, or die in that time
frame, and so either the employee will have the liquidity to exercise or it
won’t matter.)  There are
some tricky issues around this—for example, the options will automatically
convert from ISOs to NSOs 3 months after employment terminates (if applicable)
but it’s still far better than just losing the assets.  I think
this is a policy all startups should adopt.
As an aside, some
companies now write in a repurchase right on vested shares at the current
common price when an employee leaves. 
It’s fine if the company wants to offer to repurchase the shares, but it’s
horrible for the company to be able to demand this.
3) Tax treatment on ISOs
sounds good, but there’s an issue with AMT (Alternative Minimum Tax) and
employees often end up paying more tax than they were expecting.   NSO gains are taxed as ordinary income.  RSU gains are also taxed as ordinary income.
Tax optimization is a
second-order issue, and for an immediate solution, I think extending exercise
windows to 10 years is the most important thing to do.  But longer-term, we should figure out a way
for employees to be taxed on their stock compensation the same way as founders
(whether or not capital gains should be taxed less than ordinary income is a
separate discussion, but in any case I think the tax treatment should be the
same). 
I think this may be
doable.  Ideally, employees would just get
restricted stock (not RSUs), and then when they sold it’d be taxed as long-term
capital gains.  The problem is that as
the company grows, the stock has a non-trivial present value, and if an employee
were granted stock then they would then owe immediate tax on the value of the
grant.
I think there are a lot of
ways to fix this.  The easiest would be
if the IRS would agree to not tax illiquid private stock until it gets sold,
and then tax the gain from the basis as long-term capital gains and the
original value as ordinary income.
Another might be to create
a new class of employee stock.  Today, in
an early-stage company, common shares are usually worth much less than
preferred shares.  It might be possible
to create a class of shares with less rights than common and thus worth even
less.  The idea would be to convert these
shares into common on an acquisition or IPO, but before that, they would be
non-transferable and have no value.  If
it were possible to create a class of stock that the IRS agreed had next to
zero value, it might be possible to grant employees this sort of stock, have
them owe a tiny bit of tax on it now, and then have normal long-term capital
gains treatment years later when the startup goes public. 
4) Most startups do a bad
job of helping employees think about the value of their options.  At a minimum, any startup should tell a
prospective employee what percentage of the company the equity grant represents
(number of shares is meaningless).  Some
startups are very hesitant to do this—they don’t want to disclose the number of
shares outstanding.  Employees should
demand to know what percentage of the fully-diluted shares their stock options
represent, and be very suspect of any startup that won’t tell them.
A specific question worth
asking is some version of “so if I have 0.5% of company and it gets acquired
tomorrow for $100 million dollars, will I get $500,000?”  There are many ways for this not to be
the  case—there can be a huge liquidation
preference, for example—that most employees don’t know to think about.  So it’s worth asking about a specific scenario.
While you’re asking
questions, another good one to ask is “how much money did the company lose last
month, and how much is in the bank?” 
This is better than asking how much runway the company has, because
most founders calculate that off of a plan that assumes revenue growth which
does not always materialize.
 
I have two other thoughts
about stock-based compensation at startups.
First, I think employee
stock and options should usually not be transferrable.  It causes considerable problems for companies
when employees sell their stock or options, or pledge them against a loan, or
design any other transaction where they agree to potentially let someone else
have their shares or proceeds from their shares in the future in exchange for
money today.
I think it’s fair that if
founders sell stock, they should offer an opportunity to employees that have
been at the company for more than a certain number of years to sell some
portion of their shares.  And some
companies offer an employee liquidity program even when the founders don’t sell
any shares themselves.  But otherwise, I
think it’s reasonable for employees to wait for an acquisition or IPO.
Second, I think it’s time
to consider other vesting ideas.  The
standard at startups is 4 years with a 1-year cliff.  So you get 25% of your options after you’ve
been there for a year, and 62.5% if you leave after 2.5 years.
It’s possible that 4 years
is now too short—companies are often worth more than they were 10 years ago,
but they take longer to reach liquidity. 
I’ve seen some startups offer 5 or 6 year vesting schedules.  To compensate for this, they offer above-market
grants.
Another structure I’ve
seen is back-weighted vesting.  For
example, 10% of the grant vests after the first year, and then 20%, 30%, 40% in
the following years.  Again, the startups
I know that do this tie it to above-market grants, and I think it helps them
select for employees that really believe in the company and want to be there
for a long time. (Also, companies that have vesting schedules like this usually
do it for founders too.)
Finally, a third structure
I’ve seen is a new way of thinking about refresher grants.  For a company using options, it’s nice to
grant employees options early while the strike is low.  It’s possible to give “forward-dated
grants”—i.e., you can give a high-performing employee a refresher grant today
where 1/3 of it starts vesting immediately and the other 2/3 starts vesting
when their initial grant is fully vested. 
This guarantees them a low-strike price and presumably a relatively
large grant in a few years.  Dustin
Moskovitz at Asana does something like this, and I think it makes a lot of
sense.
These are just a few of
the ideas I’ve seen about new ideas for employee vesting.  But I think they’re worth considering—the
default 4-year grant does not seem to be the best option.
