
We’d like for Y Combinator to
fund more breakthrough technology companies—companies that solve an important
problem, have a very long time horizon, and are based on an underlying
technological or scientific breakthrough. 
Not many people try to start these companies, so starting a company that
will require a huge amount of time and money is an automatic competitive
advantage.  SpaceX and Tesla are great
examples of what is possible.
It used to be the case
that governments funded a lot of development of breakthrough technologies.  The bad news is that they have mostly
stopped; the good news is that the leverage of technology is such that now
small startups can do what used to take the resources of nations. [1]
We think the YC model
works well for these companies.  We
invest with infinite time horizon and are not afraid of risky-looking
companies. [2] We understand software, which will be central to many of these
companies.  We are good at getting
companies to focus on solving real problems for real customers, and not just
developing technology for its own sake.  And
our model helps companies figure out a right-sized initial project achievable
with a small amount of time and money—great companies get built with a series
of small wins that compound over time, and early momentum is critical.  A common failure mode of many ambitious
companies is to bite off an initial project that is far too big and
expensive.  Finally, we know a lot about
raising money, which will be a big part of the challenge for many of these
companies as they mature.
Here is a list (we’ll
add to it over time) of some areas we’re particularly interested in, but more
generally, we’ll pay attention to any area where technology can make the world
much better.
Energy.  There is a remarkable correlation between the
cost of energy and quality of life. 
Throughout history, when the cost of energy has come down a lot (for
example, with the steam engine) the quality of life goes up a lot.
Cheap energy would
do a huge amount to reduce poverty.  New
energy sources could also help the environment, the economy, reduce war, ensure
a stable future, make food and water more abundant, and much more.
We believe economics
will dominate—new sources must be cheaper than old ones, without subsidies, and
be able to scale to global demand.
Nuclear energy can hit
the bid, and possibly so can renewables. 
But pricing is the first order question.
In addition to
generation, we’re also interested in energy storage and transmission.  10x better batteries would enable great new
things, as would the ability to easily move energy around. 
AI. Relative
to the potential impact, it doesn’t seem like enough smart people are
working on this.
A lot of smart people
talk about AI with a combination of awe and fear, both for good reasons.  But it feels like it could be one of the
dividing lines in the history of technology, where before and after look
totally different.
Robotics. Robots will be a major way we get things done in the physical
world.  Our definition is pretty broad—for
example, we count a self-driving car as a robot.  Robots are how we’ll likely explore space and
maybe even the human body.
Biotech.
It’s still early, but it seems like we’re finally making real progress hacking
biology.  There are so many directions this
can go—fighting disease, slowing aging, merging humans and computers,
downloading memories, genetic programming, etc.   We are certain that this is going to be a
surprising, powerful and controversial field over the next several decades—it
feels a little bit like microcomputers in the 1970s. 
Healthcare. Healthcare in the United States is badly broken.  We are getting close to spending 20% of our GDP
on healthcare; this is unsustainable.
We’re interested in ways
to make healthcare better for less money, not in companies that are able to
exploit the system by overcharging. 
We’re especially interested in preventative healthcare, as this is
probably the highest-leverage way to improve health.  Sensors and data are interesting in lots of
different areas, but especially for healthcare.
Food and water. At some point, we are going to have problems with food and water
availability.  Technology can almost
certainly improve this.  Great
innovations are possible—we will need another advancement on the scale of what
Norman Borlaug did. 
Education. If we can fix education, we can eventually do everything else on
this list.  The first attempts to use
technology to fix education have focused on using the Internet to distribute traditional
content to a wider audience.  This is
good, but the Internet is a fundamentally different medium and capable of much
more.
Solutions that combine
the mass scale of technology with one-on-one in-person interaction are
particularly interesting to us.
This may not require a
“breakthrough technology” in the classical sense, but at a minimum it will
require very new ways of doing things. 
Internet Infrastructure.  We can’t
imagine life without the Internet.  We
need to be sure it keeps working—this includes everything from security to free
and open communication to infrastructure. 
The Internet is a transformative power, and we’re particularly
interested in applications that transform the big underpinnings of society
(bitcoin is a great example!).  The
Internet lets people around the world coordinate action—there are almost
certainly important businesses to be built around this concept.
Of particular interest
to us are ways to use the Internet to fix government—for example, crowdfunding
social services.
An important trend is
the API-ification of everything.  As more
and more businesses are accessible with a web API, the Internet becomes more
and more powerful. 
Levers.  We’re interested in
technology that multiplies the efforts and productivity of individuals. 
Robots are a great example, but this also includes areas like new programming
languages, powered exoskeletons, augmented reality, etc.
Science.
 Science seems broken.  The current funding models are broken and
favor political skill over scientific genius. 
We need new business models for basic research.  There are a lot of areas where scientific
developments can have huge commercial applications—materials, neuroscience,
climate engineering, and cheaper/better ways to get to space, just to name a
few—and we’d love to figure out a way for it to happen.  Bell Labs worked a long time ago but would
probably not work in today’s world.
Transportation and housing.  About
half of all energy is used on transportation, and people spend a huge amount of
time unhappily commuting.  Face-to-face
interaction is still really important; people still need to move around.  And housing continues to get more expensive,
partially due to difficulties in transportation.  We’re interested in better ways for people to
live somewhere nice, work together, and have easier commutes.
As a side note, you
shouldn’t start a company just because it’s on this list.  Our hope is that someone already working on a
company in one of these areas that might not have otherwise applied to YC will
now consider it.  The great majority of
the startups we fund will continue to be the sort of Internet and mobile
companies we’ve funded in the past, so if that’s what you wanted to do before
this post, keep doing it.  Traditional-looking
startups like Google and Facebook are obviously as important as any company one
could imagine, and clearly are breakthrough technologies. 
[1] To be clear, we are
not interested in funding patent trolls. 
We only want to fund businesses that actually solve problems and create
value. 
[2] Related to long time
horizons, if a company needs to raise a billion dollars of funding over the
course of its life, that doesn’t scare us—in fact, that’s a plus.
