
Some of these are probably apocryphal, but making predictions about the limits of technology is really hard:Space travel is utter
bilge.
-
Dr. Richard van der Reit Wooley, space advisor to the British
government, 1956Computers in the future
may...perhaps only weigh 1.5 tons.
- Popular
Mechanics, 1949X-rays are a hoax.
- Lord
Kelvin, ca. 1900
I confess that in 1901 I
said to my brother Orville that man would not fly for fifty years. Two years
later we ourselves made flights. This demonstration of my impotence as a
prophet gave me such a shock that ever since I have distrusted myself and
avoided all predictions.
-
Wilbur Wright, 1908
To place a man in a
multi-stage rocket and project him into the controlling gravitational field of
the moon where the passengers can make scientific observations, perhaps land
alive, and then return to earth--all that constitutes a wild dream worthy of
Jules Verne. I am bold enough to say that such a man-made voyage will never occur
regardless of all future advances.

- Lee
deForest, inventor of the vacuum tube, 1957There is not the slightest
indication that [nuclear energy] will ever be obtainable. It would mean that
the atom would have to be shattered at will.
-  Albert Einstein, 1932That is the biggest fool
thing we have ever done. The bomb will never go off, and I speak as an expert
in explosives.
-
Admiral William Leahy to President Truman 

Anyone who expects a
source of power from the transformation of these atoms is talking moonshine.

- Ernest
Rutherford, 1933 

The abolishment of pain in
surgery is a chimera. It is absurd to go on seeking it... Knife and pain are
two words in surgery that must forever be associated in the consciousness of
the patient.

- Dr.
Alfred Velpeaum, French surgeon, 1839Bitcoin is definitely going to be trading at $10,000 or more and in wide use by the end of 2014.- Many otherwise smart people, November of 2013Superhuman machine intelligence is prima facie ridiculous.- Many otherwise smart people, 2015(Most of these from: https://www.lhup.edu/~dsimanek/neverwrk.htm)





