
It is time for tech companies to start speaking up about
some of the actions taken by President Trump’s administration.
There are many actions from his first week that are
objectionable.  In repeatedly
invoking unsubstantiated conspiracy theories (like the 3 million illegal
votes), he's delegitimizing his opponents and continuing to damage our
society.  So much objectionable
action makes it hard to know where and when to focus, and outrage fatigue is an
effective strategy.
But the executive order from yesterday titled “Protecting the Nation From Foreign Terrorist Entry
Into the United States” is tantamount to a Muslim ban and requires objection.  I am obviously in favor of safety and rules, but
broad-strokes actions targeted at a specific religious group is the wrong solution,
and a first step toward a further reduction in rights.
In addition, the precedent of invalidating already-issued visas
and green cards should be extremely troubling for immigrants of any country or
for anyone who thinks their contributions to the US are important.  This is not just a Muslim ban.  This is a breach of America's contract with all
the immigrants in the nation.
This administration has already
shown that they are not particularly impressed by the first amendment, and that
they are interested in other anti-immigrant action.  So we must object, or our inaction will send
a message that the administration can continue to take away our rights.  
In doing so, we should not
demonize Trump voters—most of them voted for him for reasons other than the
promise of a Muslim ban.  We need their
eventual support in resisting actions like these, and we will not get it if we
further isolate them. 
The tech community is
powerful.  Large tech companies in particular
have enormous power and are held in high regard.  We need to hear from the CEOs clearly and
unequivocally.  Although there is some business risk in doing so, there is strength in numbers—if everyone does it early this coming week, we will all make each other stronger.
Tech companies go to extraordinary
lengths to recruit and retain employees; those employees have a lot of
leverage.  If employees push companies to do something, I believe they’ll have to.  
At a minimum, companies should
take a public stance.  But talking is
only somewhat effective, and employees should push their companies to figure
out what actions they can take.  I wish I
had better ideas here, but we’re going to have a meeting on Friday at Y
Combinator to discuss.  I’d love to see
other tech companies do the same. 
If this action has not crossed a
line for you, I suggest you think now about what your own line in the sand
is.  It’s easy, with gradual escalation,
for the definition of ‘acceptable’ to get moved.  So think now about what action President
Trump might take that you would consider crossing a line, and write it down.  
Almost every member of the GOP I have spoken to knows that these
actions are wrong.  Paul Ryan, Mike
Pence, Kevin McCarthy and James Mattis said so themselves when Trump first
proposed his Muslim ban.  We need to
remind anyone involved in this administration that, for the rest of their
lives, they will have to explain why they were complicit in this. 
In my first post on Trump last June,
I said it would be a good time for all of us to start speaking up.  We are
now at the stage where something is starting that is going to be taught in
history classes, and not in a good way.  This morning, Kellyanne Conway
posted on Twitter that Trump is "a man of action" who is "just
getting started".  I believe her.  We must now start speaking
up.
