
I'm going to say something
very unpopular in my world: Trump is right about some big things.
He's right that many
Americans are getting screwed by the system. 
He’s right that the economy is not growing nearly fast enough.  He's right that we're drowning in political
correctness, and that broken campaign finance laws have bred a class of
ineffective career politicians.  He may even be right that free trade is
not the best policy.  Trump supporters
are not dumb.
But Trump is wrong
about the more important part: how to fix these problems.  Many of his
proposals, such as they are, are so wrong they’re difficult to even respond to.
Even more dangerous,
though, is the way he's wrong.  He is not merely irresponsible.  He
is irresponsible in the way dictators are.
Trump's casual
racism, misogyny, and conspiracy theories are without precedent among major presidential
nominees.  He has said that a judge of
Mexican descent isn't treating him fairly because of his heritage and that we
should ban Muslims from entering the country.
When his supporters
beat up a homeless Hispanic man and cited Trump, he called them “very
passionate”.  He has accused Obama of somehow being
responsible for the recent shooting in Orlando.
To anyone familiar
with the history of Germany in the 1930s, it's chilling to watch Trump in
action.  Though I know intellectually it’s easy in hard economic times to
rile people up with a hatred of outsiders, it's still surprising to watch this
happen right in front of us.
It's hard to tell, as
it often is with demagogues, how much is calculation and how much is genuine
belief.  But it's a real and terrifying possibility that Trump actually
believes much of what he says.  In any
case, when he says it, it signals to other people that it’s ok to believe.
Demagogic
hate-mongers lead down terrible paths.  It would be particularly
embarrassing for us to fall for this—we are a nation of immigrants, and we know
that immigrants built this country (and Trump, of course, is the grandson of
immigrants and married to an immigrant).
Hitler taught us
about the Big Lie—the lie so big, and so often repeated, that people end up
believing it.
Trump’s Big Lie is
hiding in plain sight.  His Big Lie is
that he’s going to Make America Great by keeping us safe from outsiders.
But he has no serious
plan for how to restore economic growth, which is what we actually need.  Without it, we’ll be in a zero-sum game and
face continued infighting.  And without
it, we’ll lose our position as the most powerful country in the world.
He distracts us with
hate of outsiders in the hopes that we don’t notice he has no plan for the
inside.  He has failed to put forward a serious
plan for major investments in research and technology that we so desperately
need.  Instead, he tries to distract us
with fear of Them.
At least Trump is
willing to talk about the fact that the US is not on an acceptable growth
trajectory.  The Big Truth in Trump’s
slogan is “Again”—we do need a fundamental change to get back to where we were.  Clinton’s dangerously bad Big Lie is that
there’s no big problem here at all.
Trump is right about
the problem, but horribly wrong about the solution.
I take some
risk by writing this (even though I’ve supported some Republicans in the past), and
I’ll feel bad if I end up hurting Y Combinator by doing so.  I understand why other people in the
technology industry aren’t saying much.  In an ordinary election it's
reasonable for people in the business world to remain publicly neutral.  But this is not an ordinary election.
In the words
of Edmund Burke, "The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for
good men to do nothing."  This would
be a good time for us all—even Republicans, especially Republican politicians who
previously endorsed Trump—to start speaking up.Note: Anyone is welcome to republish this.Note 2: Apparently the Burke quote was not definitively said by him :(
