
On the whole, I got a great response
to my request for feedback about how YC could encourage
female founders.  It's clear there are two separate problems: 
1) Some women already starting
startups aren't interested in doing Y Combinator.
2) Some women who could be great
founders don't start startups. 
I realize it's always a bit
ridiculous for a guy to talk about what it's like for female founders, but I'm
interested in doing whatever I can to help, because the
venture business has definitely been unfair to women.  The women on our team also care deeply
about this issue, and  can do
more than I can to address it.
For point #1, one of the most
consistent messages was that we need to make it clear
that we care about the issue and want to fund more female founders.  So I'll
say that now: we want to fund more women.  And we'll keep
saying this in the outreach we do.
We want to fund more women because
it's the right thing to do, but we're not doing this for diversity's sake
alone.  We want to fund more women because we are greedy in the good
way--we want to fund the most successful startups, and many of those
are going to be founded by women.
Many are also going to be founded by
people of different races, different religions, from different countries,
straight, gay, in their 20s, or in their 50s.  All of those apply to
people in the current YC batch.  In fact, they all apply to the YC
partnership as well.  Again, we don't do this for the sake of diversity.
We do it because we want to get the best people, whatever
they're like.
In the current YC batch, 24% of the
companies we funded have one or more female founders, and there will be a lot
of companies out of those with the potential to serve as role models.  We hope that as the number of female YC alumni continues to rise, more women
will feel YC is a place that supports and respects them.
Another message was that we should do
more to make women feel welcome.  Many emails pointed out that our website
shows nearly all men; we'll fix that.  We'll also continue to work with
our most successful female founders to talk about their experiences
and mentor women that could be future founders.  We'll
continue to ask women to come speak at dinners. In
this batch, two of my four favorite speakers were women
(Adora Cheung and Julia Hartz).  And we're working on something to improve
the quality of Hacker News comments.
A very common request was for us to
have women in the interviews we do before funding companies.  In the last
batch, we had a woman in 2 of the 3 interview tracks.  We now have more
female YC partners, so for this upcoming batch, we'll have a woman in every
track.
Nearly all women who emailed me
suggested that we keep the exact same bar for women as for men (anything else
wouldn't be fair to the incredible women we fund every batch), but many pointed
out that women are often good in different ways and at different things than men--for example, that men and women express confidence differently--and that we should make
sure our criteria catch that.
A specific issue that came up is a
belief that we look for founders that look like Mark
Zuckerberg.  Actually that meme began as a self-deprecating joke. We funded a guy once who looked like Mark but ended up doing badly, and when PG
was asked by a reporter how to fool him,
he said that apparently this was one way. His real point was that looking like
Zuckerberg means nothing--that you can look remarkably like him and still fail miserably.  I think it's more
accurate to say we look for founders that have some of the qualities that have
made Zuckerberg so successful.
Finally, I heard a lot of support for
events like the Female Founders Conference and a belief that they
could help change the industry.  And if
YC continues to fund more women, many people believe VCs will follow.
For point #2, I think we can do a lot
to reach young women earlier and help teach them about
startups and coding.  Many women pointed out that
you don't have to be a coder to be a founder.  That's definitely true, and
it was a good reminder for me personally.  But I think it's good to at
least present learning to code as an option worth considering.
As we do more events, we'll continue
to reach out to women.  Kat, our director of outreach,
Jessica, our founding partner, and I will all specifically
work on this.  For example, we're thinking about holding a hackathon later this year.  It'd be great to have
a lot of women attend.
We're also going to ask some of our
successful female founders to do more outreach.  I believe we have already
funded at least one female founder/CEO who will produce a
multibillion dollar company. She and others are outstanding
role models.
There's lots of work still to do, but
we're on it.  I hope other investors will join us.
